There we go. Here
We go. You got me now.
Morning, Michael. Morning to you guys as well.
Um, welcome to the Prime
Production Select Committee today.
Um, yep. Thanks for taking the time.
You have five minutes, how you use
that five minutes is up to you.
Um, yep. So fire ahead.
Cool. Hang on a sec. I'll just get back on the screen.
Oh, geez. Computers, eh,
Well, we can see you, Can you?
Yeah. Okay. Yeah, it's, it's pretty, um,
it's a pretty simple talk.
Um, you could probably see in my submission,
I'll probably use some quite strong terms.
It's very brief. I have used the word torture,
and I'm not gonna, um, stand back from that.
Um, obviously, um, there's a lot
of concern about the way we treat, uh, animals, um,
and the industrialization of the use of their,
I suppose, flesh to eat.
So, um, I'm all for the removal
of faring crates and the industrialization of pig farming.
So I'm, I'm here like many others, just to voice my concern
for the welfare of the pigs and,
and their treatment, the sent sentient beings
and the mammals like us.
And I would like to see the removal
of all the faring crates as soon as possible.
And that's pretty much, uh, my submission miles.
It's simple and it's in line with, um, um, ethics
for many people that believe the industrialization of, of,
of, of meat farming, of animals is abhorrent
and needs to stop as soon as possible.
And that's basically what I'm expressing again today.
And the prolong, prolonging the faring crates is, um,
is a terrible idea and, um, goes against many
of our animal welfare concerns.
And, and we should be really, if anyone's gonna eat,
eat meat at all, they should at least do it in a free range
style or not at all.
Um, I prefer that,
but we certainly shouldn't be torturing, um, female pigs.
And that's pretty much my submission, guys.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks, Michael.
We've got a question here from Steve Abel.
Yep. Mr. Chair. Yeah.
Thank you, Michael, for a very succinct
and clear submission.
So I think you sort of answered my initial question was
that you, you're not opposed to,
to people eating meat per se,
but if it's gonna happen, it needs to be from animals
that haven't been put in steel cages, um, yeah.
Any part of their lifecycle. Yeah.
I wonder if you could, um,
reflect on whether you think there's been a public
expectation around the debate of sow stalls,
which we have got rid of, um,
that we don't put mother pigs in cages anymore.
And whether you think it's a, a surprise that, um,
this has even still being discussed,
let alone prolonged for another 10 years.
Yeah, yeah, totally. I think I was, I was quite shocked
'cause there was a lot of, um, celebration
or, you know, when, when this originally,
this policy regulations happened,
and then to roll them back seems a,
a terrible, a terrible idea.
Um, and something that we should, as a society,
we should certainly should not be supporting.
Um, so, uh, uh, obviously
that's part of the change of the government.
I'm saying it's pretty obvious
that the government has changed and now we've got these, um,
we're pushing these regulations back, um, in line
with other environmental concerns.
So yeah, um, this shouldn't be happening,
uh, in this day and age.
And, um, I sort of stand by, um, my words before
and everyone else who supports it, this is virtually is,
is is torturing pigs in, in, in the worst way.
And they can't display their natural behaviors at all.
And if we're gonna do it, at least, you know,
have them out in the open, um,
where they can at least leave some sort of, I don't know,
I'd say normal lives, but at least, uh, uh, not,
not crammed up in these spaces.
Thank you. Very clear. Thank you.
Cheers. Thanks guys.
Thanks Michael. Um, that thanks Michael, uh, uh, the come
to the end of your time,
but we appreciate you making the time
to put the submission in
and, um, give us a, um, an oral submission as well.
So thank you very much. Cool.
Thanks guys. Cheers. Have a good,
Right. Um,
next we have, um,
Heather, sorry, I'm just going through
my agenda here.
Where is it? Yes, so we've got Heather McGuire,
um, now, so
just wait for her to come up.
Ah, there we go. Morning, Heather. How are you?
Good morning. Very well, thanks yourself.
Uh, good, thanks. Look, um, uh,
appreciate you taking the time to, uh, put in a submission
and, and taking the time
to give us an oral submission as well.
You have, uh, five minutes, so,
um, I'll leave it in your hands.
How you use that five minutes is up to you. So
Way you go. I think my,
I think my, uh,
written submission was very brief.
Um, oral is probably better for me.
Just, uh, with regards to the, um, inhumane treatment
of the farrowing, uh,
mother pigs being in these, um, crates
that they can't even move.
Um, it's extremely cruel.
Um, yeah, they just can't even turn around.
They can't move, they get sores.
Um, it's just, it limits the, the cells natural ability to
mother her piglets, um, let alone the, the mental distress
that she has for up to five weeks.
It's just archaic behavior
and I can't believe that we are 2025 allowing it to happen.
Um, yeah, I mean we need to have, um,
free bowing pens for natural behaviors for the pigs,
for the mum pigs and the little piglets.
Yeah, that's, uh, pretty much about it for me.
I just strongly suppose, uh, these crates
and it should not be happening in 2025.
The sooner we get rid of them, the better.
Thank you, Heather. Um,
I see Steve Abel has a question, Steve. Mm-hmm.
Thank you Miles.
Um, and thank you Heather, for your submission.
Again, very succinct and clear.
Um, I asked the previous minute,
I'm wondering if you could reflect on this also.
SPCA have just done a survey that 75% of New Zealanders want
to see an end to fairing crates wanna see them banned.
Right. Did, did you have the perception that I think a lot
of people did, or at least I speculate that some people did
that um, once we got rid of Sal stalls, the cages for als,
that, that there weren't any longer gonna be mother pigs in
cages, that this was sort of an issue
that we'd debated over years
and had decided to get rid of them.
Um, and I wonder how much of a surprise it was to you
that they're still being used
and this legislation intends to keep using them
for another 10 years under the current status quo, um,
and then slightly increase the size of them after 10 years.
I wonder if it's a surprise to you that this is,
this conversation's still even happening.
It is very much. I thought that it was abolished.
I thought the farrow and crates were abolished.
Um, and I had no idea that for
that they're gonna allow it for another 10 years.
I mean, who's making these decisions
and who's allowing it to happen?
I mean, it's just abhorrent. It really is. Yeah.
So it's, yeah, complete surprise.
Hence I'm voicing my opinion.
Brilliant. Thank you. Okay, thank you.
Um, any further questions?
No, I don't have any further questions.
Um, I just hope that, um, everybody gets together
and, uh, makes, makes this horrific,
um, life for these pigs end and yeah, let them be.
Happy pigs.
Thank you Panelists. Do you have any questions? No.
Alright. Thank you very much
for taking the time today, Heather.
We appreciate that. And um,
okay. Thank you Miles a good day.
You, you too. Have a good day. Thank you. Thank
You.
Now our next submitter is Helen Andrews,
who I think is up on screen. Can you hear us? Helen
Morena? Um, yes, I
can hear you. Thank you Miles.
Brilliant. Alright, Helen, you have, um, have the floor.
You've got um, five minutes how you use that.
It's up to you. Thank
You very much. Good morning
to the members of the select committee, um,
panel hearing this morning, um, just, um, in addition
to my written submission, just wanted to make some, um,
comments around the MPI science paper that, um, refers
to lying space, um, as its, um, control, um,
measures and how that goes back to a 0.03.
Um, I know at the time when the New Zealand port farmers
were looking at those papers,
the ones we concentrated were more in relation
to feeding time being the measure of animal welfare.
And that's where we landed at the 0.034.
Um, so, um, I think it would be good
for New Zealand port farmers to understand
that lighting space measure, um, in further detail.
Um, and therefore we'd be open, open to, um,
0.03 as in the MPI scientific paper.
Um, just from personal experience here on our farm,
we are four 40 sows, um,
producing roundabout 10,000 finished pigs
and an outdoor free farmed, um,
straw based finishing system.
Um, too much space can have a negative, um,
impact on welfare for particularly young pigs when we've
got straw based systems.
'cause we have no way of heating that
because of the material used for for bedding.
So just thought it was important to highlight that point
that there is a, a fine balance between enough and too much.
Um, and also the fact
that we don't use fairing crates in our system.
Just wanted to highlight some of the behaviors we see
on farm with our sows.
So particularly in that nesting period, pre farrow, um,
the sows do exhibit something a wee bit like a frenzy type
behavior with the manipulable materials that we use on farm.
So, um, that can have been negative and positive.
So we have no control over that SOW while she's doing that.
And sometimes she can take twice as much material
as she needs into her hut to Pharaoh, um,
which has impact on the newly born piglets.
Or she can even choose not to use the hut
and the material that we've provided
and instead chooses to use the corner of the paddock,
which is fine if it's, um, a nice pleasant day.
But as you know, south island, um, well all
of New Zealand has a changeable environment
and the minute the southerly whips through, um, again,
we have a negative impact.
So just wanted to highlight the fact that
by not having, um, a confined system,
we still have challenges here on farm
by not confining ourselves, um, through the faring period.
Um, also personal experience of the sows
and the ability that we have to monitor behavior.
Sales post farrow are very, very, um, inactive.
Um, they're tired from giving birth, um,
as most mammals are.
So they're definitely in a recovery phase.
They're in a sort of a period of time where they just want
to nurse their piglets.
So the fact
that we do confine them in our indoor systems is actually,
um, has very little impact to a sale
that's actually quite inactive through that phase.
And we do see that in a non confined system too.
Um, but the benefit of fining obviously has huge impact on
those young, um, piglets.
Um, and that's always the challenge within our system.
Um, we have no ability or,
or very little ability to protect our people, um, on farm.
So the confinement during that phase assists with, um,
keeping our people safe.
It lets us do some animal husbandry if needed
or interventions if that Sarah is having difficulty
mastitis treatment.
All those kind of, um, normal husbandry procedures that need
to happen that are a challenge
because that our sales are unconfined converts to those
that are more confined.
Um, I just would like to say with my last minute
that I've got left, um,
New Zealand port farmers are definitely, um, got
that continuous improvement culture where we are committed
to the welfare of our animals.
All of our animals on farm are important to us,
whether they're newly born or in an older phase.
Um, and what we really need from this bill is the certainty
which came through menstrual Connor's, um, final statement.
Um, 'cause we do produce a really valuable protein source
for, um, you know, many New Zealand families
and long way that continue.
Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you Susan. Uh, uh, we've just got time
for one quick question from Steve Abel.
No, it's very useful to hear from a farmer.
Thank you, uh, Helen. Um, no worries.
So I, one thing I wanted to say in terms of ask, in terms
of the clarity, um, certainty, I wonder if there's a risk
that this legislation,
because it doesn't respond to the move away from fair
and crates actually creates more uncertainty for farmers.
'cause with a change of government, it's unlikely to stand
that it, that there'll be a 10 year leeway.
And so actually by pulling back on that commitment
to move away from fairing crates, we've, um,
created more uncertainty for pig farmers.
I think the, the bill really speaks to the certainty
around the timeframe that is, um, we can use them for,
and the reasons why we can use 'em for that time.
Um, so I think it gives us a really, um, fixed ability, um,
to understand what's required of us
and we can find systems that meet that requirement as well
as meet the needs of our people, um,
and our animals on farm.
So I think it's, you know,
it is really strong in that regard.
Um, and in, in some respects it's gonna be, you know, one
of the first countries in the world
to adopt this kind of technology.
So, um, you know, there will be some world firsts, um,
for New Zealand adopting this in a commercial sector.
Um, and you know, it won't be the end of where we land,
it's just the next phase
because for any animals where we've got a change in system,
we've got the animals that need to adapt
and learn to trust that system as well
as our people learning how to use it and use it.
So it's full advantages while still maintaining the fact
that we need to look
after all of those animals
that are on farm in the best way we can find possible.
So, um, I think it's really strong by the fact
that it does give us certainty, um,
and allows people to invest in the equipment
that meets the legislation.
Um, and the timeframes are excellent
for the challenges we have, um, in terms of being able to ob
obtain finance resource consent
and everything else that needs to go with that.
So thank you.
Thank you, Helen. I just, uh, want to apologize
for calling you Susan earlier.
That's alright. You,
I was looking ahead at the next submitter's name,
so thank you for taking the time today, really appreciate it
and it's um, uh, really good to get, uh, the perspective
of farmer as Steve said.
Yeah. So have a nice day and uh, yeah,
Thank you.
We'll move on to our next submitter.
So our next submitter is Susan Rose Warn.
Um, and if we can get her up on the screen.
Ah, here we go.
Good morning. Morning. Can you hear us?
Yes. And see, I dunno, you can,
it doesn't look like you can see me, but that's okay.
No, that's fine. Um, yeah, uh, technology doesn't always,
um, play the game when you want it to.
Oh, it could be my end
Look. Um, thanks for,
uh, taking the time
to put it in a submission and um, do an oral submission.
You have five minutes, um, how you use that time's up to you
and, um, I'll leave it in your hands.
Okay, thanks. Um, my, yeah, going back to
what Steve was saying earlier, my perception of creating,
I understood it to be abolished
and I was quite proud of that.
Um, 'cause I see a lot of our farmers
as leading the way globally
with animal good animal husbandry.
And, um, and I don't think,
I think you can do the two together, um, successfully.
But, um, I think for me the main thing is the kindness
and humanity to animals.
It's fine too if you're gonna eat them, it's,
it's gonna taste better if they're stress free anyways.
But it's more about, um,
giving them a nice life while they're here.
And I think the two can go together.
Um, but I just think from a, a bonding from a, a mother pig
to it's piglets, it's, it,
it's restricted in the crates to be able to do what it wants
to do, which would give stress to the animal,
which must have impact on the piglets as well.
Um, but aside on the other side of this,
as well as having good animal practices
and leading the way, um, other countries are shown
to be able to do it well.
So why can't we? But the other thing I think we should be
pushing for is we shouldn't be parallel importing.
It's something that really winds me up
that we parallel import from countries that have very,
um, unsatisfactory practices towards pigs.
And clearly their meats a lot cheaper
because of the way it's being produced.
But I think if we're gonna lead the way with husbandry,
we should not be parallel importing at the price at the
point of sale is what it is.
But the, the main thing for me is the,
the wellbeing for the
animal. Yep.
Yep. Right.
So, sorry, you finished abruptly, I thought you
Oh, well that's, yeah, it's mainly the ex husbandry.
I think our farmers are mostly very good farmers
and they wanna do the right by animals.
And I think from a animal we can do both.
We can have a farm and you can eat meat,
but you can treat them well while they're here.
I don't see that they have to be separate.
Thank you. Alright,
we have a question here from Steve Abel.
Yeah. And just to echo, I guess that's the principle
of our welfare code is that it presumes that you can,
animals can have a good life and still be farmed.
Yes. Um, the, the, um, the, the question I sort of had was,
um, what do you think the impact is on those farmers
who aren't using faring crates now?
Like half the, uh, uh,
farmer pig farmers in New Zealand have already moved away
from faring crates, and is there a sense
that it's a bit unfair for those who've led the way that,
um, now what you might call the laggards are,
are gonna be given another 10 years to catch up?
Um, well, I, I presume that if the farmers,
if there's some that are still creating
and some that aren't, I presume that at point of sale,
the ones that it's like your free range gonna cost a little
bit more and then as a consumer, that's, we drive
that behavior with our purchasing behavior.
But most general population, I don't believe would, um,
they'll be buying what's cheap,
which is generally parallel imported from a country like
Canada or Spain, where they don't tend to look
after their pigs as a generalization.
So I, I presume that if, if you've got better husbandry
and less pigs, it's gonna cost more for us to buy at point
of sale, but you eat less meat and that's okay.
Is that sort of the answer? I guess.
Thank you. Um, thank you, uh, Susan,
is there any other questions from the panelists?
No. Alright. Look, thank you very much for taking the time
to, um, put in a submission today, Susan.
Um, and we really appreciate it. It's not easy.
So, um, wish you a good day
and, uh, we'll move on to our next submitter.
So we're going to jump around a bit here, guys.
The next submitter is going to be Joanne Benjamin,
right she Morning Joanne.
Um, Joda, welcome
to the primary production select committee.
Um, we've got, uh, a series of hearings today.
You are, uh, slotted in for five minutes, so how you use
that five minutes is up to you.
So I'll leave it in your hands.
Thank you. Koto select committee called
Joanne Benjamin Aho.
My name is, um, Joanne Benjamin.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak to this amendment bill.
In 2014, my family
and I marched up Queen Street chanting ke pork off your
Fork, fork In 2020, we celebrated a victory
for pigs when the high court ruled that the use
of our crates in majoring stores as unlawful.
Now in 2025, this progress is threatened
and we cannot not let that happen.
We must provide financial assistance to farmers to move
to free flowering or ideally away from animal farming.
Altogether we must label pork products clearly as
to their origin and welfare standards.
We must restrict the importation of pork
with inferior welfare.
We must promote plant-based eating
and reduce the demand for meat products.
As a final point, I would like
to talk a little bit about relying on those close to the use
of these tools to determine their,
their appropriateness in terms of welfare.
Unless a person has experience
with these animals living in more natural conditions,
they may might not see the suffering
or they may become numb to it.
These animals may have learned helpness
as they may become despondent
and not act like natural animals.
I've seen this with stabled horses.
Without an understanding of
what normal natural behavior looks like,
one may miss the suffering.
I take, for example, those apparently quote funny
unquote videos of horses nodding their heads up
and down at speed like they're agreeing with something.
A lot of people think this is funny and see no harm.
This is in fact a stereotypical behavior from confinement.
In the pictures I've seen of so and farrow crates to sows
and even the piglets of chomping the metal bars,
this bar biting is stereotypical behavior from the stresses
of confinement borden
and the inability to exhibit normal behavior.
Please reject this bill
and end the cruelty cure for your time.
Thank you Joanne. Um, we'll, uh, move to, uh,
Steve Abel now has a question for you.
Thank you Joanne, um, for your submission
and for recalling your standing against, uh, the crates, uh,
back historically
and the decision in 2020 of the high court.
Um, are you surprised
that we are still having this debate about whether it's
acceptable to put mother pigs and steel cages
and that this bill even proposes to extend
that status quo for another 10 years?
Indeed, I'm shocked to to read about this
and that's why I am, I've written in
and I'm given an oral submission.
So thank you for the opportunity.
And, um, on the matter of, um, what happens
after that 10 year grace period, the proposal is not
to actually move to free faring or move away from 'em,
but to increase the size of permissible faring cages
by 13.3%.
Um, do you think that's a satisfactory solution
or do we need to be moving away from faring crates entirely?
Um, yes, absolutely free farrowing has been, um,
used in other countries
and the piglet mortality is, um, the same or similar.
So, um, I think we absolutely need
to move towards free farrowing.
I think that New Zealanders would be horrified to hear
that we were going backwards.
Thank you. Very clear. Do any of the pa any
of the other panelists have, uh, questions?
No. Look, thank you very much for your time today, Joanne.
Thank you. Um, Appreciate that.
And we'll move on now to our next submitter.
So our next submitter is Christine Rose.
We'll just wait for Christine to come up on the screen.
Uh, there she is. Good morning, Christine.
Welcome to the primary production select committee. Um, good
Morning. Thank you. Thanks
for the opportunity to speak today.
Excellent. You have five minutes.
How you use that, it's up to you so far away.
Thanks. I grew up on a pig farm in the Waikato,
where my dad was a pig farmer.
I've seen pigs confined
to spend their lives indoor in small spaces
who have never seen the sun.
I've seen pigs frustrated and bored with lack of enrichment
and access to the natural world.
Sorry, I've got dolphins in the background.
Um, I've seen pigs mistreated as a matter of systemic
and systematic practice.
I've seen sows
and farrowing crates unable to build nests are unable
to turn around, unable to perform usual mothering practices
with their piglets.
Although the squa Victorian type pig farm I grew up with,
and its concrete floors
and fiber, light walls have been replaced in modern systems
with plastic flooring and LED lights.
In some cases at least, the oppressive
and inhumane systems remain the same.
I still live rurally and my friends
and neighbors have genuine free range pigs.
I see those pigs wallowing in cool mud grazing on sweet
grass nest building and nurturing their piglets.
I see them bonding with each other, living full lives
as social animals lying under trees, living in shade
and sun, and know that's how all pigs should live.
Although this is my personal submission, I also worked
as a campaigner for the global organization
World Animal Protection.
One of my roles here was to analyze farm
and animal welfare policies
and practices comparing New Zealand standards
with those across the world
with a particular focus on standards in the European Union.
But you don't have to be a policy expert to know
that farrowing crates and mating stall are wrong.
You don't have to be a genius to know
that industrial pig farming methods are cruel
and deny pigs rights and needs to express natural behavior.
There's nothing natural about these modern systems
of confinement and oppression in industrial farming.
You don't actually have to have known and loved pigs
and farmed systems or in free ranging lives.
To know that pigs want to
and need to be proper mothers unconfined by steel cages
and sterile hostile conditions, you just have
to be a decent human being.
The proposed exemption
for industrial pig farmers will make the unlawful lawful.
It's an inappropriate
and disproportionate action
for a small number of pig farmers.
But for pigs, these systems are the complete experience
of the world and their whole lives.
We need to raise our moral ambition,
not reduce it as this bill does.
The argument that because overseas industrial systems treat
pigs terribly and we should too, is weak
and indefensible, it's a race to the moral bottom.
This bill takes the a of moral justice backwards.
New Zealand was a leader in the animal welfare act in its
recognition of the sentient of animals admitting the obvious
that just like dogs, pigs have emotions, feelings,
perceptions, and experiences that matter to them.
As the Animal Welfare Act says,
these can be negative or positive.
And for pigs these are mostly negative.
Boredom, frustration and pain.
You wouldn't allow dogs to be treated like this.
Don't impose the suffering on pigs.
This bill prolonged suffering
for cows throughout their lifetimes and beyond.
From when I was about 12 years old,
I've been writing submissions as part
of animal welfare processes in defense of pigs
standing up against their inhumane treatment.
And here we are in 2025, moving backwards,
pardon my French,
but with respect, I genuinely can't believe we're still
protesting this s**t.
Raise the bar for pigs in New Zealand
and for pigs whose meat is imported
for consumption here too.
Be decent human beings stop cruel pig farming.
Ending faring crates
and mating stalls is just the first step.
Thank you.
Right, thank you. We have a question from Steve Abel.
Hi Christine. And thank you
for all your years of advocacy.
Um, I wonder if people understand
and wonder if you can reflect on
how strong our animal welfare rules are on paper, you know,
in legislation by comparison to other parts of the world.
And the fact is to make this law effective, it effectively
makes what wa was found unlawful according to our rules.
Lawful it overrides, um, our strong welfare rules.
Would you agree with that?
Yeah, that's right. And it's an important point that, um,
you know, we were leaders in acknowledging the fact
that animals are sentient just like us, hopes
and dreams, fears, ability to feel pain lives that matter.
And, um, you know,
that really acknowledged a standard set, a standard globally.
And you can't derogate from that.
You can't diminish the fact that sentient is a
a, a fact that that is across animal species
and no less for pigs and for any other animal.
And yet this bill seeks to do that.
It seeks to deny the rights to, um, and,
and the the necessity, um, to nest build
and to move around and to interact, um, with piglets
and to be free from the oppression
of being not just in farrowing stalls,
but also in mating stalls.
And so that, that's why this law change is needed
because it's just not acceptable in the law.
Um, that set a precedent really imp important precedent
globally with our animal welfare act.
And, you know, this is really important.
Um, other nations
who look at New Zealand standards will condemn
what we are doing and so they should.
Thank you, Christine. We've come to time.
We appreciate you making the effort to put a submission in
and to, um, do an oral submission as well.
Thanks. Thank you. Um, committee, uh, next submitter,
um, doesn't look like they're here.
So we will, um, suspend
until 1120.
Thank you Mr. Chair. No worries. Thanks
Bob.
Just waiting for Zach Castles to come online.
He's been online but he's dropped out, so
we'll give him another minute or two.
Okay.
Oh, Hi.
Hi. Can you see me? No, No, I can't.
Oh, well there you go. Sorry.
I've had to abandon my laptop. It kept dropping in and out.
So now I'm on my phone and it's working.
Technology issues.
Yes. It'll reboot in a
minute. The laptop?
Yeah. Oh, I've, I've kicked it for touch.
I've had enough.
Oh, do a parliamentary reset, you mean? Yeah.
Oh, they're a nightmare.
I'm sure they time them just when they're
gonna be most inconvenient.
Yeah. And it's like,
does your outlook keep resetting itself as well?
Yes. Ah,
And it keeps confusing me 'cause it keeps changing.
Yeah.
Bear with us. We are getting there.
Not sure whether people having issues trying to get onto the
Parliament site or whether it's with Zoom itself
or whether they're just in areas
that don't have particularly good coverage.
Yeah.
Uh, we do.
We have Zach Castles and he's coming online now.
It sounds like he's having trouble.
Lydia, just the clerks are just struggling
to connect them up.
Yeah, he is. Been gone by the looks so, um,
maybe, um,
Chris is ready.
Brilliant.
So we're just waiting for Chris Gro.
Here we go. Chris is online.
Um, your microphone's turned off. Chris,
How about that?
That's good. Thank you very much, Chris.
Okay, can you see me? Yeah.
Yes we can. Thank you.
Thanks for persevering with us
and welcome to the Thank you Primary
production select committee today.
Thank you. You've got five minutes.
Um, how you use, that's up to you.
So, um, I'll leave it in your hands.
Great, thank you. And, and
I'm talking to a committee of two
Three of us. Um,
Yeah, three of you. Sorry. Just case
The select committees split 'em two to hear
Right Here submissions,
because there's so many. Right.
Thank you. Look, I'm, I'm a Chris tr grove.
I'm been farming pigs for 40 years.
I've got 450 sows, which I farm outdoors.
Uh, and I finished those pigs indoors.
Um, and I do support the bill
and the regulations that, um, uh, at the
hopefully be implemented.
Um, and we as farmers have faced a
huge period of uncertainty.
You know, what are the standards going to be?
Will I be able to farm economically and to stay competitive?
Um, how do I fund these costs?
You know, banks hate uncertainty, uh,
and will I get a consent?
Um, and these are huge changes.
And there was two that I'd like to sort of focus on.
And that's, um, you know, growing space and faring crates.
Um, as I said, I do farm sows outdoors,
but I use a faring crate for one week.
Um, and I do that, uh,
because sows today are such prolific animals.
Um, my, my sows are producing 14
and a half piglets per sow each time they farrow.
And I was having losses with them outside of over 25%.
Uh, I've got that down to one 10%.
So I think I'm, what I'm trying to say to the committee is
that, um, we need to understand that, uh, we need to
look after the wealthy of the sour as well
as those piglets that she has.
And the best way that we can do that is in a faring crate.
My sows are outdoors.
I bring them in, I walk them in,
they walk into the faring room,
they go into the so-called steel
crate that you're talking about.
Um, and they are calm and relaxed.
And if they could speak, they would be telling me, God,
I'm in a nice warm place.
I've gotta, I feel secure.
Um, so I'm very passionate about the fact that, um,
a fairing craters certainly, um, required
to balance both the welfare of the sour and those piglets.
Um, and to manage those changes that we're, that, um,
are coming through the welfare Act.
I think we do need, um, a minimum 10 year transition.
Um, I, there's just so much that we have to do, um,
growing space, increasing.
Um, I will need to increase the footprint,
footprint of my farm.
Um, and then it brings up all these questions from the
RM around the RMA.
Will I be able to get a consent?
Uh, no consent means no buildings
means will I become viable?
Will I become unviable?
Um, the cost on my farm alone,
and this is just to increase the, um, my footprint.
And it's not only just about increasing the footprint
of your farm, it's also about, um, the management, about
how you're going to have to change the flow.
You're gonna have to change the number of pigs
and pens, you're going to have
to change the whole flow of your shed.
So there's costs involved there.
And I would think without even thinking,
without having any expense with borrowing rates, the cost up
to my farm would be over half a million dollars.
So I think the, um, the biggest hurdles that we have, um,
and once the
Welfare Act is implemented
or the regulations are implemented, will be, um,
getting consents to make these changes.
Um, and can the government help me help support, uh,
these changes through land use rules and the district plans?
Um, there's things like separation distances,
there's reverse sensitivity.
Um, I've had a, um,
a very stressful time over the last couple of years with a,
a new neighbor that came in to live next to my farm
and decided that she didn't like pig farming, um,
and caused me a huge amount of stress.
And that's around reverse sensitivity.
So, um, how, how can,
or can the government help me
help the industry remedy this issue?
Um, and I think there's, we can,
is there a mechanism under the RMA
that could override the consent provisions that we need
to meet the welfare standards?
Um, I'm not suggesting that we need to, uh,
that we are going to increase in our, um,
production or anything like that.
All I'm saying is that we need to be, how are we going to,
um, meet these consents?
Getting a consent
and going through the resource consent process is a huge
issue, uh, and cost.
Um, and that was where I think that there's, um, we can,
if we had some support of government, even if it was about
how, um, we can, um,
make some changes so that, um, we can
continue farming under the new welfare conditions.
The other area, of course is imports.
Um, how do we stay competitive with imports?
Why should importer meet, not be able
to meet our new welfare standards?
You know, our standards are probably not, um, where Steve
or some, some, some New Zealand would like them to be.
But, um, how, how do, how do we meet?
Why should import meet, not meet those standards?
And also why should that meet
that's being important to this country?
Um, not, uh, be labeled as such
as not meeting our standards.
So I do support the heck, I do support the new regs,
and I do have a couple of provisions.
And one is that the, when the code is ISSU issued, that we,
um, that any, that we are allowed time
that, you know, we do need these 10 years.
I mean, these costs, these changes are gonna be
particularly costly for us.
Um, and that the RMA
and the consent process doesn't impede us in trying to, uh,
to implement the new we welfare standards.
So, um, I would like the government
to co would they consider a mechanism that enables farmers
to upgrade and expand their footprint
to meet these new welfare standards. Thank you.
Thank you, Chris. Look, um, we've gone over time, so
I really appreciate the effort that you've made to, uh,
give us a submission day
and, um, it's good to hear, um, uh,
someone who's involved in the industry, um,
outlining the issues that they're having.
So thank you very much. That
Was excellent. Thanks Chris.
Thank you. Thank you.
Right. Our next submitter is Zach Castles.
I understand that he's been waiting
then, might still be having a,
um,
here we go.
If you could turn your mic off, Zach or Mike on Sorry.
Look, thank you for taking the time today, Zach, for, um,
to, uh, submit.
You've got five minutes and, um, we're all ears.
So the floor is yours.
Alright. Um, yeah, well, I won't go over time.
How about that? How about I go under time?
Um, this isn't my, um, I'm not involved in this industry.
I'm just a sort of a, a, a city dwelling, you know, citizen,
um, who cares about animal rights, and that's why I'm here.
Um, uh, Chris asked for more,
the last speaker asked for more time.
I, I'm kind of confused by that
because I would've thought he had quite a lot
of time already, um, given the 1999 Animal Welfare Act,
you know, did its thing
and decided, oh, animals must be able
to exhibit their natural instincts and behaviors.
That was 26 years ago.
Um, and then the pretty sure it was the labor
government around 2020.
Um, there was a, during that time, there was a case won
by Safe and a whole lot of animal rights lawyers, um, which
I'm pretty sure at that point in time, I mean,
I haven't done much research here,
but that seemed to ban what we're now talking about.
And that was six years ago.
So, um, you know, six years is six years.
I do understand there's investment in all sorts of stuff
to do, but nevertheless, here we are at 2025
and we're still talking about it.
Um, and, you know, I just don't understand it really.
Um, I don't think it, it just seems
to me like the industry's writing the rules here,
and that's pretty disgusting because
whenever that happens, you end up with a pretty weak set of,
uh, a pretty low moral bar
and a weak set of, um, restrictions on legislation.
So that, that seems, you know, doesn't look right to me.
Um, these faring crates are cruel and should be banned.
So why is it taking, you know, you know,
Sh At some point we gotta move, make some progress.
And surely that time is, you know, I mean,
all time passes all the time.
And where are we getting to now?
You know what, we can keep kicking the can down the road
and have, you know, low standards.
But what's the point in that?
Um, you know, if if farmers like Chris can't, uh,
follow the law and a reasonable standard of animal rights,
then perhaps they shouldn't be farming.
You know, if, if it does, if it is uneconomic,
then you know, that's perhaps that's, that's it.
You know, so what I'm saying is there a standard here,
an animal rights standard,
and we've, we've, it's been through the court process
and we've, we've decided on it.
We've got it. So, you know,
one day some government's gotta have the guts
to make it happen, you know, so
that's all I gotta say, really.
I'm done.
Thanks. Uh, Zach, uh, we have a
question here from Steve Abel.
Thank you, Zach. Thanks for making a submission.
Um, yeah, on that point, I wonder, uh,
fig Farms are concerned about the uncertainty they've had
over, over years now.
Um, but it seems to me that given the strong public feeling
that you, uh, impart express, um, it's,
it's not a pathway to certainty to lock in the status quo
cages for another 10 years
because a subsequent government is going to be compelled
to respond to the public feeling on this
and ensure that our farming is in line with social license.
And so this legislation doesn't give farmers certainty
either, let alone meet our welfare act.
Yeah, for sure. Um, I mean, I agree.
Like it's, uh, I just,
I can't see the harm in aiming high and starting now.
I mean, there isn't much uncertainty
in the certainty in the future.
And I understand farmers running a business,
they've gotta do their best, but, um, you know,
kicking the can down the road
for another 10 years just seems like a, a terrible kind of
a terrible what a waste.
You know? He, we, you know, you, you can't do
that on every front all the time,
otherwise you never get anywhere, you know,
so, yeah, I agree.
Thank you. Thanks very much, Zach.
I appreciate you taking the time to put a submission in
and to, uh, give an oral submission.
Um, wish you well for the rest of the day
and we'll move on to our next submitter.
So our next submitter is, um, Natalie Jessop.
Uh, here we are, Natalie's up online.
So, um, welcome
to the primary production select committee, Natalie.
Um, you have five minutes, how you use
that time's up to you.
Um, and, uh, you have the floor.
Oh, uh, Koto.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
So, um, yeah, as you know, my name is Natalie Jess,
and I'm here to, uh, express my very strong opposition, um,
to this animal welfare amendment Bill.
Uh, what we are witnessing is a huge step backwards.
Uh, this bill puts cruelty into law
and shields it from future challenge.
The courts have already found these confinement practices
unlawful, and instead of respecting that judgment
and moving forward,
this government is declaring these cruel systems.
Legal, Uh,
pigs are intelligent sentient beings who deserve to move
to nest to care for their babies
and to live according to their natural instincts.
Instead, they're going to be trapped in cages barely larger
than their bodies unable to turn around
for over a month in cases
and reduce to breeding machines, uh,
mating stools will remain legal for up
to three hours at a time.
And the sm and the so-called improvements are ridiculous.
A small 13% increase in space for grower pigs,
and these minimal changes won't even take effect until 2035.
This will mean 10 more years of suffering.
This isn't even good business sense
and is focused on basic cost savings.
Without looking at the biggest strategic opportunities,
New Zealand has built its reputation on clean green
premium products.
We could be leading the world in ethical farming,
and we could be charging premium prices
for free range happy pigs raised in systems
that lead the way and reflect better values.
Instead, we are offering practices that are cruel
and make us indistinguishable from industry factory farms,
anywhere else in the world, there is huge demand
for quality products,
but instead of seizing that opportunity,
we are racing to the bottom.
Instead of being able to position ourselves
and the sector as progressive.
This bill supports practices that Sally,
the entire industry, it's regressive and it's cruel.
We also live in a digital era where we can educate,
mobilize, and make people aware of what's going on.
We can rapidly share
and expose horrible farming practices,
effectively reducing consumer demand and market share.
It is easier than ever to damage brands reputation
and shareholder returns.
Um, there's also a political reality here.
Um, so I come from a national voting family.
My parents have supported the National Party for years,
and they're appalled by this bill.
They did not vote for cruelty
to be legislated and to permanence.
They did not vote for the government
to override court decisions, protecting animals.
This isn't what the majority of New Zealanders want,
and this isn't who we are, what we do
to others, we do to ourselves.
When we normalize cruelty, when we accept suffering
as a price of a better ROI, when we turn away from those
who cannot defend themselves, we diminish ourselves
and our own humanity.
I'm asking you to reject this bill.
Uh, don't support an outdated industry
that ruins the reputation of everybody else trying
to do things well and trying to do things better.
Please don't force sentient beings
to endure another 10 years of confinement and suffering.
I'm here to ask you to do something that feels good,
not greedy, and to do something
that feels great and not cruelty.
Um, please stand on the right side of history.
Help us be a leader and not a laggard.
Stand against cruelty and do the right thing
and reject this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Natalie.
Um, we have a question from Steve Abel.
Thank you, Natalie. Um, it's very clear submission.
Um, I wonder if it's the expectation of your family that,
uh, the commitment the high court made in 2020
or the direction the high court gave, uh,
the government in 2020 to get rid of fairing crates
would've been fulfilled, uh, by a national government.
That was in fact, the government
that brought in our strong welfare act in 1999.
Um, and I wonder if, um, it's a shock to them
that this government's extending the
status quo for another 10 years.
They're utterly shocked
and they only found out about it when I emailed them.
I think part of the issue is that, um, if there's a sense
that it's been really rushed through
and that, um, the public hasn't been made aware,
but yeah, they're, um, it's not
what they thought was happening
and, um, they're just, they're just disgusted really,
and just quite outraged, I think.
So, um, it might be able to get shunted through,
but I think, um, there's gonna be a huge,
once people find out,
I actually think there's gonna be quite a
big public backlash.
Um, and my parents are a bit of a, um, litmus test
for me in terms of like public sentiment.
Um, they live on the North Shore.
They're, they're blue voters.
They're all their friends are national slash act.
Um, so, uh, they're indicators for me on, on where,
um, the vast majority
of the New Zealand public stands on this issue.
And I know sample size of two,
but more often than not, um, uh,
what they tell me is, is quite representative of, um,
what their, um, what their peers are telling them
and what they're hearing on their on one CB as well.
So, uh, I think it is quite, um, yeah,
for me it is quite relevant that their opinions
and where they stand on this.
Thank you. Thanks very much, Natalie.
We've gone over time. I appreciate you taking the effort to,
um, put in a submission and, um, speak to it.
So thank you very much and, um, enjoy the rest of your day.
Thank you, you too. Thank you.
We'll move on now to Casey Chambers.
Just wait for ca. Here we go. Um, welcome. Good day, Casey.
Welcome to the primary Production select committee.
Um, hello, you've got, uh, five minutes
to make your submission, uh, use that time's up to you,
so I will leave it in your hands.
Thank you very much, miles. Um, so
my stance on the government's proposed plan
to continue the current practice of faroh
and crates until 2035, um,
I strongly oppose the government's proposed plan.
Um, the fact that not only this decision
to override the plan, like of banning faring crates
was 11 weeks
and one day shy of the ban being fully implemented,
but the members of the public only had two weeks
to publicly submit their feelings about this bill when
select community usually offers six weeks of public,
um, submissions.
So just in that of itself,
I feel like this bill has been incredibly rushed.
And I echo the s sentiments of the last two speakers that,
um, if the public were actually made more aware
of this issue and had more time to submit,
I think you'd be getting a lot more people
who would be opposing this bill,
which is maybe why it has been rushed,
because I feel like it's sort of more,
this decision is led by industry
and what benefits the industry rather than
what the public actually thinks about it.
Um, also, sorry, am I shaking?
Um, like animals were recognized
as sentient under the Animal Welfare Act in 2015,
and sentient means an ability
to experience feelings and sensations.
And currently in the Animal Welfare Act, um, you,
you probably are aware of the five freedoms,
freedom from hunger and thirst, pain, injury
and disease, freedom to express, express normal behavior
and freedom from fear and distress.
Um, so based on this very basic criteria alone,
faring crates are a breach of the animal welfare act
because they don't allow the sow
to express normal natural behaviors such as nesting
and caring properly for her young.
Um, they don't allow freedom of movement.
Um, you know, the sow can stand up and sit down,
but she can't even turn around
and she can't move freely, which causes her
very severe psychological and emotional distress.
Um, pigs have been, um,
and maybe this is like sort of unpopular opinion
because of that,
pigs are not given the same moral consideration
as other animals simply
because they're raised on farms and seen as a product.
But pigs are actually in fact the most intelligent animal on
the species in terms of the species that live on our planet.
Um, they have incredible cognitive capabilities
and a deep capacity to experience emotional feelings
and have empathy towards their fellow, um, companions.
So to keep these pigs in these Faron crates is just in terms
of, um, a animal that actually has
higher cognitive capabilities than dogs,
and in some aspects even children.
Um, if you can imagine, you know, a dog in that position
or a child in that position, um,
we would be a lot more receptive to that.
Um, those feelings of distress, I think.
And then we have to account for the public thinks.
Um, from the research that I've done,
an overwhelmingly large amount of people
oppose this, this ban.
Um, 88% of Kiwis have concerns about fing crates
for the reasons that I've just mentioned,
because of the psychological distress, the inability to move
and not able to care for her piglets.
Um, and only 16% of Kiwis actually think that this plan
that the government's proposing is a good idea.
Um, let's see.
And um, the high court, obviously, as people know,
and you are also aware of,
the high court ruled this practice of faring crates
as illegal in 2020.
So for our government to override this
and to propose that faring crates are continued until 2035,
um, it's just a huge disregard to
the high court and just a blatant, um,
ignoring of not only law, but what is morally right
and what is morally just, um,
and we should be really considering, you know,
scientific evidence
and also public opinion when it comes to
something like this.
And finally, I guess I'll also say that two things actually,
that the SPCA
and MPI are the key negotiators when it comes
to the animal welfare act.
As I understand,
SPCA has not even been consulted on this proposed
plan the government is putting forward.
Um, so that's not okay. Um, that's not fair.
And also, there are other countries in the world now such
as Finland, Sweden, and Switzerland, who have banned
not only permanent farrowing crates,
but temporary farrowing crates
and now use open farrowing pins.
And they have been designed in such a way to decrease
piglet mortality and also more on piglet mortality.
Um, faring crates actually increase the likelihood
of stillbirths, so it doesn't necessarily actually
decrease the mor the mortality of piglets
and also the cells can't even care for the young properly.
So what chance do they have of, you know,
surviving in such harsh, horrible conditions?
You know, they don't have nests,
they don't have comfortable warm shelter.
Um, they're trapped in these horrible industrial, you know,
factories where animals,
no animal should be living in this way.
Um, and they are 'cause they're considered products.
So I think, you know, in order for New Zealand to
claim like we have high well welfare standards when it comes
to animals, for us to overturn
the ban on faring crates is a huge, huge, huge setback,
um, for us as a country.
And, um, yeah, basically I just think that the,
the proposed plan to ban the fair
and Crate should be honored and no changes should be made
to the animal welfare act to tailor to what
industry wants.
Because at the end of the day,
the Animal Welfare Act is for the animals.
It's, it's, it illustrates how we should treat animals
and how yeah, just how we should treat animals.
You know, it's not for industry really, you know, it's,
it's about the animals
and it should be about the animals. So, um, thank,
Thank you Casey.
We've, um, run well over time.
So I appreciate you taking the effort today
to give us an oral submission.
Wish you the best for the rest of the day,
and the committee will move on to our next submitter.
Okay, thank you. Our next submitter is
Robin Greens slate.
Uh, good day Robin,
and welcome to the primary production Select committee.
Thank you Today, um, you have, uh,
five minutes for your submission.
Alright. Uh, you use that time's up to you.
Um, and I'll leave it in your hands. Thank
You. And thank you for the opportunity,
uh,
to make a submission on the use
of pig farrowing crates in New Zealand.
I am speaking today to express my strong opposition
to the continued use of these confinement systems.
Uh, it does cause immense suffering
and it con contradicts the values and compassion, fairness
and respect that New Zealanders whole.
Dear. Um, five years ago, the government committed
to phasing out bowing
and mating crates following clear legal, ethical
and scientific findings, uh,
that these systems cause extreme suffering
and breach the Animal Welfare Act.
That commitment reflected the will of the New Zealand public
and the moral leadership we expect from those entrusted
with power to now reverse that progress into allow a return
to such barbaric confinement is not only a betrayal
of trust, but a step backwards for our nation.
For our nation's integrity, it undermines years
of consultation, scientific evidence,
and the values that define us as a human society.
New Zealanders deserve a government that stands by its word,
not one that bends to industry pressure at the cost
of compassion and decency.
So my, my points, um, I've, I've got five
or six points here I'd like to bring up.
You know, um, the, the first one,
the New Zealand High Court previously ruled that the use
of foing and mating crates breach the Animal Welfare Act.
Following this, the government committed
to phasing out their use, a decision
that reflected both science and public values.
Reversing that commitment now undermines public trust,
the justice system,
and progress already made in animal welfare reform,
which is, which is very, very disturbing.
Um, and two, um, you know, the crates can find pigs
so tightly as we know, they can't turn around
or express natural behaviors causing immense
suffering and distress.
This goes against New Zealand's core value of compassion,
fairness, and respect for living beings.
Scientific studies confirm that prolonged confinement leads
to severe psychological and physical harm in pigs.
And, and as the last speakers just spoke, you know, uh,
they're such highly intelligent, soft, loving animals and,
and to be treated with such cruelty is, is incomprehendible.
Um, you know, the majority
of New Zealanders opposed cruel farming practices,
maintaining Crate systems damages.
New Zealand's international reputation as a humane
and ethical food producer.
Major trading partners
and global food companies are already moving towards
crate free systems.
And that's what I believe that we were doing as well.
Um, and, and I was happy to be part of
that movement five years ago.
Voting this barbaric treatment out.
Um, many farmers are already adapting
to crate free systems successfully.
Supporting this transition encourages innovation,
sustainability, and long-term economic resilience.
Create free systems improve animal health,
reducing vet costs, and boosting productivity.
I've also read up a little bit about intensive confinement
farming leads to waste management issues
and environmental pollution, more ethical systems aligned
with broader environmental and public health goals.
Um, so I think New Zealand has
long been a global leader in animal welfare,
upholding the commitment to phase out crates honors
that legacy and reflects our national character.
One rooted in kindness, integrity, and compassion.
So thank you for considering, uh, the submission.
I strongly urge the government
and the relevant authorities to uphold the previous decision
to end the use of pig freights
and continue, continue leading the world in ethical humane
farming practices.
And at lastly, I'd have to say, um, I, myself
and all my family and my, and,
and my, my parents, we've all been national voters
and the boys voted national.
But for them to turn around and reverse this
after five years, when it's meant
to be put into practice right now, it, it would be enough
to flip me and a lot of people I know in my family to say,
this is wrong and we cannot support national
as a government if it's going to do this.
And, and, and another thing, you know,
they say you can tell a lot about a nation
by the way they treat their animals.
And it doesn't say much for us if we reflect back to this
unfair, cruel treatment.
Pigs deserve better. Thank you.
Thank you, Robin. We've got time for one quick question.
Um,
Steve,
Steve, you're on mute.
Sorry, chief, just wanna pick up on your point, Robin,
about social license
and that, um, this is so widely opposed
by the public survey shows sort
of 75% plus people don't wanna see fair rates.
So how much do you think, uh, the,
there's a real misjudgment here of public sentiment
around the issue of putting mother pigs in steel cages?
Um, are you asking, um, do, do I feel
that the 75 opportunity New
Zealanders are gonna feel that way?
Yeah, I mean, does it, so I
I I think strongly every, everybody that I talk with feels
that way, but pe people, um,
as the last two speakers have said, the,
the public aren't actually aware.
And I think that, um, we, we need more, um, education.
Uh, we need more, um, uh,
documentaries on TV showing the public
what these animals endure to.
We need to get behind this.
Uh, and I, I know a lot of people feel this way,
75% you said,
but, uh, nobody really knows their lives
to pay their bills and they just let it slide.
And, and it's, it needs to be, needs to be, um, brought
to the attention of the public more.
Thanks very much, Robin. We've come top to time.
Thank you very much. Appreciate you taking the effort
to put oral submission today. Thank you
Very much.
And we'll move on now to, uh, Leith Grayden,
who is our next su, um, submitter.
And I think Leh might be on phone. Uh, yes. Oh, you say am.
Good morning. Uh, um, yep. Still. Good morning.
Good morning Lith. Um, welcome
to the primary production select committee.
You have five minutes to make your submission.
Hey, use that time is up to you,
so I'll leave it in your hands.
Thank you. And thank you for listening to my submission.
Um, as like the last two
or three people, I come up from myself, we keep pigs.
My parents voted national.
Um, they'd be turning in their grave at the, um,
and what I want to say, I've got three points.
The first I want to make is speciesism,
which is in a talk by Jane Goodall.
I discovered how humans distance themselves from animals on
purpose to justify their exploitation.
We are actually all connected.
The organs of pigs are so similar to humans
that they're used for human cures as in diabetes
and as as in heart value replacement.
The connection isn't just physical.
Jane Goodall heavily emphasized our emotional connections.
Ricky, the same he has said, animals are not here for us
to do as we pleased with.
We are not their superiors. We are their equals.
We are their family. Be kind to them.
The second point I want to make is respect for the law.
And a couple of your speakers have already said this
by changing the time taking for farmers
to substitute farrow and crates.
I feel you've disrespected all the lawyers,
all the grassroots workers,
the justice system, and the pigs.
You've undermined public trust.
I'm appalled and insulted by this disregard,
and I feel a lot of anger also at the fact that over
and over again, we have to say that powering crates,
caging any animal is cruel and it's wrong.
The third point I want to make is economics versus ethics.
I've noticed that this particular government,
maybe it's just media, I don't know,
but it seems to me very much that all the rules
that have been reversed and has been locked, um, are
to favor economics, rather over favoring humanity.
I haven't studied economics, but I know how to budget
and I know how to triage
and I know what's more important to ease suffering
or the goss national GDP.
Our world needs less materialism
and more care for many reasons.
Ecological, psychological, and ethical with animals
and cages, you're virtually paying for their torture.
And it is torture that's not too strong a language.
It's mental and physical torture.
And I would really, really like you to just for one minute,
see how you would feel stuck in a bowel crate.
Even just for one week.
I think you'd be yearning for the physio to come
and ease your aching joints.
I used to be a nurse, and that's what we did in hospital.
Someone had a stroke, their joints can't move.
Joints are made to move.
So by we, by passive movement, we used to move their joints
or, um, relieve them with massage.
Brains or minds also need interesting stimulation.
These things are inherent instincts,
which the law said we should be observing in animals.
I hope that you can feel the pig's point of view.
I really hope you can. And I hope
that you'll please stop the faring crates as from next year
as was agreed, the agreement made in 2020.
And that's all I have to say.
Thank you Lith. Uh, what Happens now?
Oh, So we now have a question from Steve Abel.
Yep. Thank, thank you very much, lith.
Uh, that's a very clear submission.
Um, I wonder if you can expand on
what you alluded to, is that, um,
it's actually in greater Good. Can you hear me okay?
I can't hear you. Ah, can you hear me?
Oh, we're having a few issues here.
Can you hear me? That's all right.
Um, if there's technical issues, then
let's, we can leave it.
But it was a strong submission. Thank you.
LI think, yeah, we've lost her.
Um, look, that was the last submission for the, this, uh,
part of the hearings.
We'll be back at one for the, um,
combined, um, hearing.
So, um, I'll see you all then in, in the, um,
this meeting is ended.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, you at one o'clock.
Thanks Paul. See you.
Thanks Sue. Thanks to all the clerks.